.. _top-oops-toymodels-model_l95:

Lorenz95 model
==============

Introduction
------------

The Lorenz95 model is an application of the Lorenz (1996) chaotic dynamics. This model is governed by :math:`I` equations:

.. math::
  \frac{dx_i}{dt} = -x_{i-2} x_{i-1} + x_{i-1} x_{i+1} - x_{i} + F,
  :label: eq:toy-model_l95

where :math:`i = 1, 2, \ldots, I`, with cyclic boundary conditions, and the constant :math:`F` is independent of :math:`i`. The variables of this model may be thought of as values of some atmospheric quantity in :math:`I` locations of a latitude circle. The so-called 40-variable version of this model assumes :math:`I=40`, with :math:`i = 1, 2, \ldots, 40`, which implies to the cyclic boundary conditions being defined as: :math:`x_{0} = x_{40}`; :math:`x_{-1} = x_{39}`; and, :math:`x_{41} = x_{1}`.

YAML parameters
---------------

The configurable Lorenz95 model parameters are as follows:

* :code:`geometry`: define grid parameters

  * :code:`resol`: define the number of variables :math:`I`

* :code:`model`: define model parameters

  * :code:`f`: define the constant :math:`F`
  * :code:`name`: define the model
  * :code:`tstep`: define the time step

* :code:`forecast length`: define the length of the forecast
* :code:`initial condition`: define initial condition parameters

  * :code:`date`: define the initial date to issue a forecast
  * :code:`filename`: define the name of the file to be used as initial condition

* :code:`output`: define output parameters

  * :code:`datadir`: define the directory to save files
  * :code:`date`: define the output date
  * :code:`exp`: define an experiment identification
  * :code:`frequency`: define the frequency to save output files
  * :code:`type`: define the type of output file

.. note::
  Although the YAML parameters are defined using real time quantities for dates and time intervals (e.g., :code:`date`, :code:`tstep`, :code:`forecast length`, :code:`frequency`), the actual equivalence between real time and the time considered for this model is defined as a combination of the number of variables :math:`I` and the constant :math:`F`. See details in Lorenz (1996) and Lorenz and Emanuel (1998).

References
----------

Lorenz, E. N., 1996: Predictability: a problem partly solved. Seminar on Predictability, 4-8 September 1995, volume 1, pages 1–18, European Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasts, Reading, England. ECMWF.

Lorenz, E. N. and Emanuel, K. A. (1998). Optimal sites for supplementary weather observations: Simulation with a small model. J. Atmos. Sci., 55(3):399–414.
